# Chapter 4: Smarter Forecasting and Speculative Execution

Author: Su Fang 589498

!!! note "Introduction"

    In a pipeline processor, the average execution time (CPI) of an instruction is composed of three parts: pauses caused by the processor's own structure, pauses caused by control flow, and pauses caused by data access. Since the latter two have a non-negligible contribution to CPI, blindly accumulating resources to achieve deeper and wider pipelines cannot linearly improve performance.

This chapter focuses on how to reduce control flow-induced pauses through smarter prediction and speculative execution. Chapter 5 will focus on how to reduce pauses caused by data access through the design and optimization of the memory access system.

A branch instruction will cause control flow dependence. In pipeline processors, this dependence usually needs to be released after multiple cycles. Before the control flow dependency is released, the processor will not be able to decide the next instruction path, which will cause a large number of bubbles in the pipeline. In order to reduce the wait caused by this kind of control flow, high-performance processors usually adopt a mechanism of branch prediction + speculative execution. Before the control dependency is released, execution continues speculatively on the path indicated by the branch predictor, thereby improving the degree of parallelism at the instruction level.

If the processor can ensure that speculative execution is always on the correct path, then pipeline stalls caused by the control flow of the program can be completely eliminated. However, because incorrect speculative execution will cause pipeline flushing, the efficiency of speculative execution is restricted by the accuracy of branch prediction. In particular, as processor issue width and pipeline depth continue to grow, the cost of pipeline flushing due to incorrect speculation also increases. Therefore, how to improve branch prediction accuracy has become a permanent topic in the field of computer architecture. From the dynamic branch prediction mechanism based on 2-bit saturation counter in 1984 [[1]](https://www.computer.org/csdl/magazine/co/1984/01/01658927/13rRUy3gmUL), to the combination of global branch history gshare predictor for history and branch instruction PC information [[2]](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.626.4268&rep=rep1&type=pdf), Moving on to the TAGE predictor [[3]](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03408381/) and the perceptron predictor [[4]](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/903263/) in modern processors, the branch predictor has become one of the most complex subsystems in the CPU. In modern ultra-scalar processors, although branch prediction accuracy can reach 99% or higher, branch prediction is not a solved problem. Intel's research shows that based on the Skylake microarchitecture, the performance gain from optimizing branch prediction can reach 18.5%. If the depth and width of the processor are doubled, the gain can reach 55.3% [[5]] (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9042108). In this chapter, we explore how to implement a smarter and more accurate prediction mechanism from two aspects: branch direction prediction and jump target prediction.

## Direction Prediction Direction Prediction
Continuing to improve the accuracy of branch predictors requires overcoming a small number of "hard-to-predict branches (H2P branches)" that cannot be accurately predicted by TAGE or perceptron predictors. H2P branches may originate from data dependencies, changing function inputs, or dynamic loop boundaries [[6]](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5452016). Related work focusing on solving the H2P branch can be divided into the following four categories.### Reduce the cost of prediction errors
This type of work does not have the main goal of improving the accuracy of branch prediction, but attempts to reduce the cost of prediction errors. In 2007, researchers from Intel and NCSU proposed to divide instructions that need to be flushed after branch prediction failure into control-dependent (CD) and control-independent (CD). CI) two categories [[7]](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1273440.1250717?casa_token=Xw0DRE4jKcYAAAA:WmRpAG j6Gw0fFkXTEN7sJtscbEnhMybmhUithGLjLk38Qal3MY2A7HEPNk5py27nJnucA8IrMAkvtQ), the latter of which has the opportunity to not need to be flushed after a branch misprediction. Furthermore, CI instructions can be further divided into two categories: control-independent-data-dependent (CIDD) and control-independent-data-independent (CIDI) based on whether they have data dependencies on instructions in the CD area. Because CIDI instructions are completely independent of mispredicted branch instructions and affected paths, these instructions do not need to be flushed or re-executed when branch prediction fails. The CIDD instruction needs to be re-executed using the data dependencies on the correct path after a branch prediction error. Detecting CI instructions can be done automatically by hardware [[8]](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/1410082) or based on the compiler explicitly giving the range of CIDI instructions [[9]](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10 .1145/3466752.3480045?casa_token=ftyU0dXu0yAAAAAA:YrJ-2QeyNUgiZ8nJK-7NhR3Ep31rx0u5xjlDzr-9DnFdVOyU92miWSETMB4v7YPf2YdMW4bbrqzuaQ).

### Auxiliary predictor
This type of work implements domain-specific predictors as auxiliary predictors of the main predictor by exploring the intrinsic characteristics of the H2P branch. In fact, the common return address stack (RAS) and loop predictor (Loop predictor) in modern CPU branch prediction subsystems adopt this idea. For more general H2P branches (for example, the branch direction depends on the load result), Eric Rotenberg's research group at North Carolina State University proposed a predictor based on the correlation between the access address and the branch direction [[10]] (https://people.engr.ncsu.edu/ericro/publications/conference_CF-7.pdf). This work can dynamically connect the access address and the branch prediction direction, and override the prediction results of the basic branch predictor (such as TAGE) when this connection is subsequently discovered. The task of detecting the correlation between the branch direction and the memory access address can also be left to the compiler [[11]](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.718.4740&rep=rep1&type=pdf). Similarly, [[12]](https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/23191) proposes to find the dependency between the branch direction and the value accessed, and use this dependency to make more accurate predictions than the basic predictor.### Execute branch in advance
Unlike auxiliary predictors, methods in this category seek to execute H2P branches in advance to obtain accurate branch directions. In 2012, Rami Sheikh of North Carolina State University proposed a Control-flow decoupling mechanism to extract the H2P branch in the loop and calculate it in advance during compilation [[13]](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6493631). This mechanism requires adding a branch result queue (branch queue) in architectural state, and adding new instructions in ISA to support reading and writing of this queue. Similarly, [[14]](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3466752.3480053?casa_token=-7M2BDCrb48AAAAA:q3SomUqKgyrexky4VxsdxtREd6R0Z1T19O SAJluEI8ZVeW3_tkPLoLH0q43QwAWquDYh_dXWCXd3Rw)[[15]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.09064.pdf) seeks to execute H2P branches in advance in a way that is invisible to software. These methods will incur greater hardware overhead.

### Eliminate branches
The last type of method uses predicated execution to convert the control flow into a data flow, thus completely eliminating unpredictable branches. Not using assertion execution for all H2P branches can improve performance. Since assertion execution requires computation of both paths of the branch, this introduces additional pipeline occupancy. Therefore, how to estimate when to use assertion execution based on factors such as the number of instructions on both sides of the branch, the prediction failure rate of the branch, and the pipeline flushing cost is an important technical issue in this method. In 2006, Hyesoon Kim of UT Austin proposed the Diverge-Merge Processor [[16]] (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4041835), which uses the compiler to mark some possible H2P branches, and the hardware chooses whether to perform assertion execution during dynamic execution. In 2020, Intel further implemented the work of marking H2P branches in hardware, and can intelligently choose when to perform assertion execution without the involvement of a compiler [[17]] (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9138936).

## Target Prediction Target Prediction
In addition to direction prediction, the branch predictor also provides prediction of jump targets. The structure that implements this function is usually called BTB (branch target buffer). A more ideal BTB can not only reduce erroneous target predictions, thereby reducing pipeline flushing; it can also make instruction prefetching more accurate in the decoupled front-end architecture (FDIP). However, since the growth rate of software complexity is much higher than the growth rate of hardware performance, the working set of modern programs has far exceeded the capacity that the instruction cache and BTB can support. Especially in the field of servers and data centers, the capacity of BTB has been stretched [[18]](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3470496.3527430?casa_token= ewg698X3hroAAAAA:8oDbxY9H-UF3j9T3C-gDxxbjYVsMEYxl9rLQxRcbzPts8PwqDAws8NWHljVaW-WF_74J1L9aIsaWmg). As shown in the figure above, in recent years, the capacity of BTB in CPUs from various manufacturers has been significantly increasing. But even so, since BTB access is on the critical path of branch prediction, the capacity of BTB cannot grow indefinitely. There are two types of work to solve the problem of insufficient BTB capacity:### Secondary BTB cache
In 2009, Andreas Moshovos proposed to borrow L2 Some ways in the cache record the missing history of BTB [[19]](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1508284.1508281?casa_token=RsN 4EBuum2gAAAAA:O2pHuJ2wWZT5EXaRgFkRvvv9hhgU-oHwi9m_pVzd-k2HTuRyf4MxUI57GZVDqZfBUrJWh0JR2JXaJQ). The main advantage of this method is that there is no need to add additional storage space, but it also faces the problem of competing for L2 capacity with the instruction cache and data cache. In 2013, IBM introduced a dedicated L2 BTB in its z12 mainframe design [[20]] (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6522308), and the hardware selected the appropriate time to perform bulk preload to the L1 BTB. This design has been used in the 2020 z15 processor.

### BTB prefetch
Prefetching is a common method to increase effective BTB capacity without significantly increasing area overhead. In 2017, Boris Grot of the University of Edinburgh proposed a mechanism to achieve BTB prefetching without adding additional storage [[21]](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7920850). This method parses the jump instructions and jump targets in advance when the instruction cache line is prefetched to the L1 instruction cache, and prefills it into the BTB. In 2021, researchers from the University of Michigan proposed a software-based BTB prefetching mechanism for data center applications [[22]](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3466752.3480124?casa_token=QK4N7xRRu cMAAAAA:NcFO0-wdWmN28yjF8KFzGzThv17ojAFzIL82gJu_MRpzFQ-vQXOyCA1pLRvw4N8fENmolVHFu1ailQ), the main challenge faced by this method is the need to add BTB prefetch instructions to the instruction set.

## How BlockISA enables more efficient predictors

When traditional instruction sets support selective pipeline flushing, they usually require a reorder buffer (ROB) to support insertion or deletion operations at the granularity of instructions. Thanks to the hierarchical instruction set design, BlockISA only needs to flush or re-execute at the block granularity when supporting selective instruction flushing, which greatly reduces the hardware complexity of ROB.

On the other hand, since BlockISA centrally expresses the control flow at the header instruction (header) level, there is no need to resort to the traditional instruction set prefetch instruction + early decoding method to prefill the BTB. Instead, it directly prefetches the BTB content from the header instruction segment of the program, making it easier to achieve more efficient BTB prefilling.