#Introduction

Author: [Boris Grot](https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/bgrot/) and Ruoyu Zhou (532827)

The general-purpose CPU has been, and continues to be, the beating heart of every high-performance computer system on the planet. From smartphones to supercomputers, CPUs are tasked with execution of varied and demanding workloads many of which are challenging targets for accelerators. Indeed, while programmable accelerators, such as GPUs and ML-specialized processors, have found significant adoption, their utility is limited in a number of dimensions, including applicable workload domains, supported programming models, memory capacity, etc. Even for workloads that are amenable to acceleration, there exist phases of execution that must run on the CPU. Given the central role that the CPU plays in computer systems, it is not surprising that recent market research forecasts strong growth for the CPU market with a projected expansion of over 30% from 2020 to 2027 (from $85.5 billion to $112.8 billion USD)

Every CPU is comprised of one or more cores that fetch instructions of a program thread and operate on them. The means to achieving high single-core performance are timely delivery of instructions and data to the core. Historically, high-performance CPUs have addressed this challenge through an ensemble of microarchitectural techniques that use aggressive speculation, prediction and caching to uncover instruction- and memory-level parallelism and hide latency of the memory hierarchy. While these techniques are extremely powerful, they are fundamentally hardware intensive. Caches, branch predictors, stateful prefetchers and value predictors all require significant amounts of storage and potentially high microarchitectural complexity to achieve high efficacy.

Transistor-intensive designs employed by modern processors have been afforded by Moore’s Law, which for over 50 years has powered CPU innovation by affording ever-larger transistor budgets. Problematically, Moore's Law is nearing the end. Today's state-of-the-art processors are manufactured in 5nm technology, and the semiconductor industry is actively working on 3nm and 2nm devices. The future beyond that is uncertain, with many experts doubting the industry's ability to scale device sizes into the sub-nanometer range.

While the pace of advancement in semiconductor technology is rapidly slowing, the performance and memory demands of applications are skyrocketing. These trends on the application side are driven by growth in dataset sizes, more sophisticated algorithms and latency constraints of online processing.

Given the above trends, the question for the CPU industry is how to scale performance in the face of the challenges presented by a slowdown in technology scaling, growth in dataset sizes and emergence of new, performance-hungry classes of workloads. Toward that goal, this white paper presents promising research directions in areas of computer architecture, memory systems and performance telemetry.
