# Future Memory Subsystem

## New virtual memory abstractions

Address translation stands as a significant performance bottleneck in workloads that operate on very large datasets, particularly in the presence of virtualization where a TLB miss triggers a nested page table walk requiring as many as 24 accesses to the memory hierarchy to retrieve the translation. The importance of low-latency translation is likely to increase in the future with emergence of larger/deeper cache hierarchies as well as memory fabrics (e.g., CXL and Ubus) that will allow nearly limitless memory capacities.

Techniques to lower the performance cost of address translation can be broadly classified as either disruptive or non-disruptive with respect to today’s virtual memory system that combines a radix-tree based page table (PT) with a TLB, and supports a few different page size options. Notably, performance potential of existing proposals is directly correlated with how disruptive the technique is – highest performance is achieved with techniques that require major changes or a complete overhaul of today’s virtual memory system.

### Non-disruptive approaches:
Most non-disruptive techniques exploit memory contiguity to increase TLB reach either through the use of larger pages [[Cox, ASPLOS 2017](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3037697.3037704)] and/or by coalescing adjacent translations into a single TLB entry [[Coalesced Large-Reach TLB](http://www.cs.yale.edu/homes/abhishek/binhpham-micro12.pdf)], [[Translation Ranger](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3307650.3322223)]. These techniques have been shown to offer modest performance improvements with little or no changes to virtual memory subsystem, making them attractive for near-term implementation. A somewhat more aggressive approach is prefetching of translations for deeper levels of the page table during a page walk [[ASAP:Prefetched Address Translation](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3352460.3358294)]. While this approach requires OS support, it can achieve considerable reductions in page walk latency without any modifications to the page table or TLB organization.

Another prefetching optimization is based on the insight that data accesses whose address translations require a full page walk are unlikely to hit in on-chip caches. To accelerate such cases, recent work proposes translation-triggered prefetching in which the data access following the page walk is delegated to the memory  controller servicing the page walk – when the page walk completes, the memory controller can immediately launch the access for data, thus saving tens of cycles of latency by avoiding the on-chip propagation delays to and from the core [[Translation Triggered Prefetching](http://www.cs.yale.edu/homes/abhishek/abhishek-asplos17.pdf)]. The approach is attractive in that it requires only microarchitectural support with no modifications to the OS or the ISA. However, research and engineering effort is needed to make the proposal practical in the presence of multiple memory controllers with realistic address interleaving policies and with many cores launching concurrent address translations.

### Disruptive approaches:

These approaches call for a significant rethink of the virtual memory system. Here we discuss two of the most promising ones: hash-table based PT and intermediate address spaces.

- **Hash table PT**: In order to avoid the latency of serialized memory accesses inherent with the page walk of a radix tree PT, researchers have proposed using a hash table PT instead [Yoav, Cookoo]. With a good construction, a hash table PT offers single-access translation in the common case, which is a significant improvement on a multi-level page walk required by the radix tree-based design. This is a boon for workloads with massive data working sets in which TLB misses are common and page walks often go to memory. Moreover, with a hash table PT, translations can still be cached in a TLB. However, the hashing of addresses required in these designs sacrifices the spatial locality inherent in translations, which complicates (but doesn’t entirely preclude) coalescing and other optimizations that exploit spatial locality in translations. Exploring techniques that enable exploiting spatial locality with hash table PTs may be a worthwhile research direction.

- **Intermediate address space**: Another line of research has proposed a new virtual memory abstraction in which virtual addresses are mapped to an intermediate address space that is used to access the cache, and only off-chip cache misses require a translation to the physical address space [[Midgard](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9499765/)]. Intermediate address space exploits contiguity within virtual memory regions (VMAs) to ensure a low latency translation with simple hardware for loads that hit on-chip. Because existing hardware support for accelerating address translations, namely TLBs and translation caches, already ensures low average-case translation latency for on-chip cache hits, the benefits of intermediate address space are prominent only when cache capacities are truly massive – e.g., if DRAM caches are used.

A particular challenge for the intermediate address space approach is supporting page faults for store instructions, since stores are typically buffered in the store buffer and are released to the memory system much later than when the store instruction commits. With an intermediate address space, a page fault will be realized only when the store accesses the cache, which is when address translation is performed. The precise exception mechanism mandates that the faulting store be re-executed, which means that a mechanism is needed to delay store’s retirement until the cache access. This breaks the existing store buffer architectural paradigm, requiring a practical solution to be developed -- the original authors left this to future work [[Midgard](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9499765/)].

!!! info "Summary"

    In the short term, a modest amount of research with a greater emphasis on engineering should focus on non-disruptive approaches to reduce the performance impact of address translation in near-term systems. This needs to include robust support for coalescing, aggressive usage of larger page sizes, and exploration of higher-cost/higher-benefit techniques such as translation prefetching and translation-triggered prefetching.

    At the same time, it is important to study new memory abstractions for future memory systems. In this regard, the hash table PT approach appears lower friction implementation-wise and more general than the use of an intermediate address space, whose benefits are high only in the presence of massive cache capacities. Nonetheless, both approaches should be aggressively researched to better assess their true costs and benefits as a function of cache size in realistic deployment scenarios. Moreover, the two approaches are complimentary in that cache misses that require translation to the physical address when using the intermediate address space can be served using a hash table PT. And while combining the two approaches would be the most costly proposition in terms of effort, it may be done incrementally (first one, then subsequently the other) to deliver the highest possible gains across the full spectrum of usage scenarios.

## Tomorrow’s Memory System

The rapid growth in dataset sizes across many domains is driving the evolution of the memory system. There is a constant need for higher memory capacity; at the same time, application performance requirements do not allow for an increase in average memory access latency. These considerations are driving the establishment of new tiers in the memory hierarchy and call for techniques to manage data movement between the tiers to optimize for latency and bandwidth. For caches, stacked memory technologies will enable multi-GB capacities; for memory, technologies such as CXL and Ubus will enable scalable memory fabrics that will afford massive memory capacities but at significant latency differential between local and remote memory. Below, we focus on each of these in turn.

### Caches:

The semiconductor industry is entering a phase where dramatic improvements in transistor density will be difficult, if not impossible. Given the fundamental challenges in significantly increasing the capacity of planar caches, stacked caches appear highly attractive. Both research and industry have demonstrated stacked cache designs using both SRAM and DRAM technology. The question is how to best organize a stacked cache.

Most stacked cache architectures employ a shared architecture, where any core can access any portion of the cache. While this configuration serves as a natural extension of the on-chip last-level cache (LLC), which is also shared by all cores in today’s designs, it suffers from high access latency that is only slightly faster than main memory. Recent research has made a case for a fully-private cache hierarchy where private L1 and L2 caches are backed by a [private stacked LLC [SILO](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8574569/)].

The private organization offers each core low access latency to its private slice and is also immune from inter-core contention, unlike shared cache designs. Existing work, however, is limited to caches stacked on top of the CPU, an approach that is invasive and may not be feasible from a thermal standpoint. Research is needed to extend the private cache architecture to support 2.5D stacked cache topologies.

### Tiered memory:

Two complementary trends will drive the emergence of tiered memory. One of these is the emergence of memory fabrics, such as CXL and Ubus, that allow practically limitless expansion of a node’s memory capacity. The second trend is the use of memory offloading technologies that seek to increase effective utilization of local memory through compression [[Software-Defined Far Memory by Google](https://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/csjgwang/CloudNativeDB/WSCMemoryASPLOS19.pdf)] and/or offloading to a high-performance SSD [[Transactional Memory by Offloading by Facebook](https://www.pdl.cmu.edu/ftp/NVM/tmo_asplos22.pdf)]. All of these technologies will necessarily increase the access latency to remote or offloaded memory by up to an order of magnitude compared to that of local memory, effectively creating a tiered memory system, where conventional memory on the node (local memory) is backed by a larger capacity but much higher-latency remote memory.

There are several challenges associated with tiered memory. The first is identifying pages that can benefit the most from residing in local memory. Recent work [[HotBox](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3520263.3534650)] shows that given a massive memory working set with byte-addressable remote memory (e.g., in the memory fabric scenario), default Linux mechanisms developed for page swap are often unable to discriminate page hotness to a sufficiently high degree so as to make good decisions as to which pages should reside in the local memory tier. Architectural support to track “hotness” at high fidelity may help.

Another issue is access locality both in temporal and spatial domains. Read-only pages with no spatio-temporal reuse (i.e., when a single cache block is accessed on the page) or pages that are streamed (i.e., no temporal reuse but high spatial locality) present an opportunity for memory bypass, whereby the cache lines are installed directly into the processor cache hierarchy but the associated pages continue residing in remote memory [Thermostat, HotBox]. Bypass can significantly lower data access latency by avoiding TLB and page table updates in the critical path of the access, and the potential write-back latency and bandwidth for cases when the evicted page is dirty. To facilitate such optimizations, there is a need to accurately classify pages in a vast pool of memory based on expected temporal and spatial reuse to drive runtime decision-making. There also must be support for multi-granularity data movement spanning cache line, small page and large page granules.

Support for low-latency page compression and decompression is another high-value target for hardware support, as it can reduce the storage footprint at remote memory and can also reduce transfer latency and save bandwidth.
