# Core Architecture

In simplest terms, the key to achieving high core performance is timely instruction and data delivery along with accurate prediction of conditional branches. In practice, these are complicated by large instruction and data working sets, data-dependent control flow, and irregular memory access patterns. Thus, despite sophisticated branch predictors, wide-issue cores, large instruction windows and multiple prefetchers, modern cores are frequently starved for both instructions and data.

## Eliminating the Front-End Bottleneck

Massive, multi-megabyte instruction working sets in mobile and server platforms result in frequent misses for instructions at L1 and L2 cache levels. Such misses for instructions cannot be hidden by out-of-order machinery, and thus are performance critical because they leave the core front-end starved for instructions.

While the front-end problem is acute in server and mobile domains, there is good news, which is that research in this area is very and a range of viable solutions exists. Specifically, researchers have identified three types of approaches for overcoming the front-end bottleneck:

### Fetch-directed:

**Fetch Directed Instruction Prefetching (FDIP)** relies on the core front end (branch predictor + BTB) to predict the future instruction stream, which is then prefetched with simple logic interfacing with the L1-I [[FDIP](https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~taustin/papers/MICRO32-fdp.pdf)]. This class of techniques relies on a good branch predictor, but more importantly, a high-capacity BTB to identify “discontinuities” in the code. Recent work showed how to incorporate BTB prefetching to enhance BTB reach in these approaches at nearly zero cost [[Boomerang](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7920850)], [[Shotgun](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3296957.3173178))]. The strength of FDIP-based approaches is that they are purely microarchitectural. The most aggressive of these Shotgun can deliver high performance by accurately prefetching both instructions and BTB entries and come with almost no storage overhead, but require significant changes to the BTB organization and rely on instruction pre-decoding for BTB prefetching. The main limitation of FDIP-based approaches is that they are constrained by BTB capacity – achieving high front-end performance requires a high-capacity BTB.

### Temporal streaming:
Also known as record-and-replay prefetching, temporal streaming records the L1-I access or miss stream generated by the core using a compressed format. Subsequently, the stream is replayed to prefetch instruction cache blocks into the L1-I [[TIFS](https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~twenisch/papers/micro08.pdf)], [[PIF](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2155620.2155638)]. More recent work demonstrated that the prefetched cache lines can be predecoded to extract branches and pre-fill the BTB [[Confluence](https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/bgrot/pubs/CONFL_MICRO15.pdf)]. For server workloads, temporal streaming has been shown to be highly effective in covering L1-I misses at the price of a high metadata overhead (hundreds of KBs) for each active application. However, the metadata can be virtualized in the cache or even stored in DRAM.

### Software-directed:
In the software-directed approach, the compiler inserts ‘instruction prefetch’ instructions [[ASM-DB](https://people.ucsc.edu/~hlitz/papers/asmdb.pdf)], [[I-SPY](https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~barisk/public/ispy.pdf)]. Such approaches are attractive in that they require minimal microarchitectural support and carry no storage overhead in the CPU. However, they require ISA support, increase the code footprint and necessitate ahead-of-time profiling to determine where to insert the prefetches.

!!! info "Summary"

    The most promising long-term approach is the use of software-directed instruction prefetching (approach 3, above). These approaches are appealing because they can deal with large instruction working sets (unlike fetch-directed techniques whose effectiveness depends on BTB size) and do not require large amounts of metadata (unlike temporal streaming). Moreover, software-directed approaches are compatible with BTB pre-fill (same idea as used in existing temporal streaming works [[Confluence](https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/bgrot/pubs/CONFL_MICRO15.pdf)]). Research opportunities in this area include reducing code footprint associated with the additional instructions (e.g., by exploiting spatial contiguity in fetch targets) and on-the-fly profiling and generation of prefetch instructions through low-overhead JIT mechanisms.

## Toward Better Branch Prediction

With the introduction of perceptron and TAGE branch predictors, the accuracy of branch prediction went through a phase of significant improvement. However, in recent years the improvements have plateaued. Here we examine the main sources of branch mispredictions and promising directions for overcoming them.

- **True data dependence**: today’s branch predictors learn control flow correlations – i.e., correlations across multiple executions of the same (local) or all (global) branch executions. However, some branches tend to be only data dependent, cannot be predicted using control flow history, and lack a strong bias (i.e., the direction of the outcome – taken/not taken – is not highly skewed). Such **hard-to-predict (H2P)** branches are the only kinds of branches that are fundamentally challenging to predict with existing branch prediction technology.

- **Predictor capacity**: the combination of deep software stacks and complex workloads leads to massive branch working sets that are difficult to accommodate in practical-sized conditional branch predictors.

- **Predictor warm-up time**: for many branches, effective resolution requires learning a history pattern that may require many executions of the branch to learn. While the branch predictor is warming up, it is reasonable to expect mispredictions for the affected branches; we can think of these as compulsory mispredictions. Typically, the training time can be amortized over the time slice in which the workload executes; however, for workloads with extremely short execution times or frequent context switching (e.g., serverless functions or mobile phones), the execution time may simply be insufficient to train the predictor.

- **Design and microarchitectural limitations**: these include insufficient history length, choice of hashing function and other engineered artifacts that ultimately impact accuracy.

Next, we discuss promising directions to tackle challenges associated with the first three sources of mispredictions.

###  H2P branches:
A key observation for H2P branches is that resolving the branch requires accessing the memory hierarchy, which fundamentally is a high-latency operation. Techniques that can pre-execute the branch are the most promising in this regard. Published techniques in this area include [[Control Flow Decoupling, MICRO 2012](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1109/MICRO.2012.38)], [[Speculative slices, ISCA 2001](https://zilles.cs.illinois.edu/papers/slice.isca2001.pdf)] and [[Branch Run-ahead, MICRO 2021](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3466752.3480053)]. All three techniques come with limitations – control flow decoupling only works for separable branches that have no loop-carried dependencies needed to compute the branch outcome. Helper slices require executing a potentially large number of software instructions in a timely manner to pre-compute the branch outcome. Branch run-ahead forms slices on-the-fly in hardware but in many cases is severely limited in terms of coverage and timeliness of its slices.

In general, branch pre-execution is arguably the most promising direction for H2P branches since. Research in this area should focus on cooperative SW/HW approaches that are not limited in their ability to form potentially complex slices, but also benefit from hardware support in knowing when to trigger slice execution (in terms of timeliness and profitability) and mechanisms for reducing the instruction overhead of slices (e.g., through dedicated execution resources for slices [[MeetTheWalkers](https://www.pure.ed.ac.uk/ws/files/14176097/Kocberber_Grot_et_al_2013_Meet_the_Walkers.pdf)].

An out-of-the-box idea in this space that is worth assessing is the store-to-load branch predictor [[SLB](https://lca.ece.utexas.edu/pubs/hpca_2013_umar.pdf)], which observes that for many data-dependent branches, the values with which in-memory data structures are initialized are often used at a later point in the program to resolve branches [[SLB](https://lca.ece.utexas.edu/pubs/hpca_2013_umar.pdf)]. Using SW/HW co-design, SLB pre-computes branch outcomes at the time the relevant data structure is initialized by using the store values (instead of load values that would normally be used for branch prediction) and stores the pre-computed outcomes elsewhere. Later, when the data structure is traversed and predictions need to be made, SLB uses the load addresses to fetch the pre-computed outcomes and use them for branch prediction. It would be useful to evaluate SLB with modern workloads to understand the opportunity on mobile and server spaces.

A lighter-weight approach for dealing with data-dependent branches is to reduce the branch resolution latency by prefetching the value used to resolve the branch into the L1 cache. This can be done via pre-execution or another prefetching technique. Although this approach does not improve the accuracy of branch prediction (and thus, it does not eliminate pipeline flushes due to mispredicted branches), it can improve performance by resolving data-dependent branches quickly. Notably, data prefetching for branches pairs well with predication, whose effectiveness partly depends on fast predicate resolution. It would be worthwhile studying the interplay of these two techniques.

- **Branch predictor capacity**:

Similar to caches, future branch predictors will need to employ multi-level predictor hierarchies and prefetching to hide the access latency to larger/further predictor levels. In general, there is a lack of work in this area, though one study did examine virtualizing the TAGE branch predictor and storing its state in the memory hierarchy or dedicated secondary storage, and reported promising results [[Sadooghi-Alvandi & Moshovos: virtualized TAGE](https://www.eecg.utoronto.ca/~moshovos/research/vbp.pdf)]. Research and engineering effort is needed to develop microarchitectural mechanisms to guide allocation of branch metadata across the levels of the branch predictor hierarchy and to develop prefetching techniques to hide latency of accesses to lower levels.

!!! info "insight"

    Notably, there exists unexplored synergy with instruction prefetching. For instance, by predicting upcoming control flow at coarse granularity (method or cache block level), instruction prefetching can drive branch predictor prefetching by signalling which “history regions” should be transferred into levels of the branch predictor hierarchy closer to the core. This is a fantastic problem for research that may yield productizable results in a modest amount of time.

- **Branch predictor warm-up time**:

In principle, the solution to reducing or eliminating the warm-up time in an environment with repeat invocations of the same application is to save and restore the branch predictor state. (Note that security concerns in the wake of Spectre dictate the branch predictor state be flushed in-between context switches; alternative is adding process ID per branch, but that’s very costly in terms of storage). Unfortunately, large branch predictor storage budgets of today (e.g., 64KB) and frequent context switches (e.g., ~1ms in serverless and mobile environments) make this a challenging problem that has received minimal attention from the research community.

We are aware of only one work that has examined this problem in detail and proposed a light-weight auxiliary predictor that can be cheaply saved and restored on context switches and that can make predictions while the main predictor warms up [[BRB, HPCA 19](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8675222)]. However, branch prediction accuracy on restoration is nonetheless sacrificed and, at 8KB, it is not clear where to store the saved branch predictor state particularly in a setting with hundreds or even thousands of active contexts – a reality in today’s mobile and serverless environments.

One promising research angle is to leverage a multi-level/virtualized predictor design for addressing the branch predictor capacity problem (see previous subsection) to also solve the warm-up time and context restoration problem. That is, saving the secondary branch predictor state across context switches, and using it to refill the primary predictor when the application is context switched back. Once again, there is synergy with instruction prefetching here, as noted in the subsection above. All of this presents a fruitful research target.

## Data Delivery Challenges

Long-latency misses for data stand as the single biggest challenge – and opportunity – for many workloads, particularly in data-intensive domains. The reason is that off-chip misses to main memory can take hundreds of processor cycles to resolve, an amount that exceeds the latency-hiding capability of today’s instruction windows. While there is no “silver bullet” that can alone address this challenge, there are a number of promising directions that can likely deliver meaningful performance gains, especially when used together.

### Prefetcher ensembles

A wealth of prior work in data prefetching points to the fact that misses are often correlated, and these correlations come in various forms including strided, temporal [TMS] and [[Spatial memory streaming (SMS)(https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~twenisch/papers/isca06.pdf)]. For programs with complex access patterns, multiple types of streams may coexist, pointing to the fact that a one-size-fits-all approach is unlikely to be effective.
Recent work has made the same argument and proposed a light-weight framework for ensemble prefetching at the L1-D [[Bouquet of instruction pointers](https://www.cse.iitk.ac.in/users/biswap/IPCP_ISCA20.pdf)]. While the work does not consider temporal streaming, it does cover strides and spatial streaming to L1-D and across cache levels. Extending this proposal to encompass more recent prefetcher designs, such as [[Berti MICRO 2022](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9923806/)] and [[Pythia MICRO 2021](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3466752.3480114)], as well as [[Spatial-temporal memory streaming STeMS](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1555815.1555766)] would be useful.

Aggressive prefetching, particularly in the context of an ensemble of multiple prefetchers, may generate a large number of useless or redundant requests. Prefetch filtering has been shown to be an effective way to improve prefetch accuracy without sacrificing coverage by using a perceptron-based filter to discriminate among prefetch requests based on expected usefulness [[Perceptron-based prefetch filtering, ISCA 2019](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8980306)]. While the work evaluated prefetch filtering with only one prefetcher (SPP), it would be worthwhile to study prefetch filtering with other prefetchers, including prefetch ensembles, and to tune it to work at different levels of the cache hierarchy.

### ML-based prefetchers
Recent works have demonstrated that prefetchers based on machine learning (ML) can learn complex patterns, often outperforming individual non-ML-based prefetchers in terms of coverage and/or accuracy. Indeed, one recent work has demonstrated that a skilfully-designed neural prefetcher, called Voyager, can vastly exceed the performance potential of state-of-the-art prefetchers through a combination of high coverage and high accuracy – a holy grail of prefetching [[Hierarchical Neural by ShiZhan侍展](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3445814.3446752)]. Alas, the proposed design requires a model with an inference time of over a microsecond (i.e, thousands of clock cycles!), which is not practical. Another work, Pythia, has demonstrated an implementable prefetcher based on reinforcement learning [[Pythia MICRO 2021](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3466752.3480114)]. While Pythia is practical and has been reported to outperform non-ML-based baselines, it offers much lower gains compared to Voyager.

The above indicates a significant opportunity to be exploited by leveraging ML in prefetcher designs. A key challenge, however, is to make powerful designs, such as Voyager, practical; that is, to achieve both high coverage and high accuracy in an implementable design. One hypothesis is that a fully general prefetcher that tries to cover the entire policy space of strided, spatial and temporal accesses with one architecture, similar to Voyager, will necessarily end up with a complex network topology that will challenge implementation realities – again similar to Voyager. Instead, it would be prudent to consider an “ensemble of experts” approach to prefetching, where several different light-weight prefetchers are employed to capture different types of access patterns; some of these prefetchers might use ML, others might not.

In general, ML-based prefetchers present an opportunity to bring together ML and computer architecture experts to work on a common problem. For design teams, the opportunity is to take the promising candidates and evaluate them under realistic constraints to understand their strengths and weaknesses, and feed their observations back to researchers.

### Speculative Preexecution

For loads that frequently miss in higher cache levels (L1 and L2) and whose access patterns are irregular and hence not amenable to prefetching with hardware prefetchers, speculative preexecution stands as a promising solution [[Speculative slices, ISCA 2001](https://zilles.cs.illinois.edu/papers/slice.isca2001.pdf)]. In speculative preexecution, a backward slice from the load instruction is generated to enable computation of the effective address of the load. Then, the slice is executed ahead of the load itself, but instead of the load, a prefetch is issued to bring the data into some level of the cache hierarchy. Slices can be formed by the compiler based on profiling [[Dynamic speculative precomputation](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/991128)] or learned entirely at the microarchitecture level [[Slipstream](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/384264.379247)]. Software prefetching is, in fact, a simple form of slice-based preexecution.

While learning slices in hardware may seem appealing, the effectiveness of such approaches may be limited by hardware’s ability to deal with complexities including intra-slice branches and function calls, loop-carried dependences, etc. A software-based approach may afford higher coverage since the compiler can generate slices of arbitrary complexity. A compiler also has greater flexibility in deciding where to insert the trigger point for slice execution.

Regardless of whether slices are formed in software or hardware, two potential drawbacks exist for slice preexecution. First, instructions forming the slice become part of the instruction stream and, thus, increase the dynamic instruction count. The extra instructions may reduce the effective instruction window, potentially resulting in a lower MLP for demand memory accesses and thus negating the performance benefit of prefetching. Secondly, slice-based prefetching may turn out to be unprofitable; e.g., because of the difference in dataset size or locality characteristics at runtime as compared to profiling time.

Research and engineering work is needed to realize full benefits of slice preexecution. This work should seek to achieve the following objectives:

-	identifying loads that can benefit the most from slice preexecution – i.e., are performance-critical and not amenable to hardware prefetching;
-	providing support for dynamic slice triggering based on runtime feedback metrics (likely with the help of new architectural extensions);
-	dynamic slice generation or optimization (e.g., using binary rewriting or a JIT engine) to minimize the instruction count in the slice based on runtime knowledge;
-	providing dedicated execution resources for slices, potentially in the form of a light-weight offload engine (e.g., one or more in-order cores [[MeetTheWalkers](https://www.pure.ed.ac.uk/ws/files/14176097/Kocberber_Grot_et_al_2013_Meet_the_Walkers.pdf)] or a [CGRA [DySeR](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6235947)] to mitigate the impact of slices on core resources including fetch bandwidth and instruction window capacity.

We note that preexecution for data delivery has a natural synergy with branch preexecution, discussed above (for H2P branches). Both require slice to be formed and executed, and stand to benefit from the same optimizations – this allows sharing the research and engineering effort between the two approaches.

!!! info "Summary"

    Optimizing data delivery to the core is likely to deliver the largest gains for workloads with large data working sets. The most valuable direction to pursue is centered on prefetching, whereby specialized prefetchers (including both ML and non-ML based ones) are combined into a prefetch ensemble, and the remaining loads that are performance-critical yet not covered by the prefetch ensemble are targeted through slice preexecution. Beyond that, better cache management policies [[Mockingjay](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~lin/papers/hpca22.pdf)] and cache bypass for loads predicted to miss in the cache hierarchy [Hermes] should be investigated to further improve data delivery. For all of these techniques (prefetching, cache management, load bypass), particular attention must be paid to ensure robust performance in many-core settings, where contention-induced noise will diminish the stability of reuse patterns and, thus, impede learning.
