# ACR switch

The ACR status of a Linx logic core (LxLC) can be changed by the following events:

1. Linx logic core (LxLC) external interrupt.
2. Linx logic core (LxLC) internally executes exception.
3. The block where the [acre](../inst/misa_s/ACRE.md) instruction is located is submitted.
4. The block containing the [acrc](../inst/misa_s/ACRC.md) instruction is submitted.
5. Preparation and submission of [system-call block](../blockIntro/xb_block/intro.md)

This change usually also causes changes in the program execution sequence. This comprehensive change can be divided into two categories:

* One layer (command) level switching
  *`ACR_ENTER`. This is mainly used for management software to actively hand over control of the Linx logic core (LxLC) to the managed software. The block commit where the `acre` instruction is located falls into this category.
  *`SERVICE_REQUEST`. This is mainly used by the managed software to return control of the Linx logic core (LxLC) to the management software. Linx logic core (LxLC) external interrupt, internal execution exception, or the block commit of the `acrc` instruction belongs to this category.
* Second level (command) level switching
  * `ZXTERMZH9QXZ`, system-call block switches to the target ACR when called, and restores to the ACR before the switch after the commit phase ends.

## ACR_ENTER

ACR_ENTER is requested through the `acre` instruction and is fired when the block is committed.

For an ACR_ENTER initiated from ACRn, the specific process is:

1. The ACR state of Linx logic core (LxLC) switches to system register [ECSTATE_ACRn](../register/ssr/ECSTATE.md).ACR. The target ACR must be comparable to the current ACRn, and ACRn p>= ECSTATE_ACRn.ACR. Otherwise this step itself triggers E_INST(EC_PARAM)exception.
2. Use the content of `SSR:ECSTATE_ACRn` to restore the current state of `SSR:CSTATE` (that is, make the content of the latter's effective field completely consistent with the former).
3. Use `SSR:EBPC_ACRn` to restore the contents of the BPC and schedule the execution of the block where the BPC is located.
4. According to the `ACRE.RRA` parameters, choose whether to use the contents of `SSR:EBARG_ACRn` to restore `BARG`.
5. If block type recorded in `SSR:EBARG` is STD, SYS or FP, use the content of `SSR:ETPC_ACRn` to resume TPC execution;

## SERVICE_REQUEST

SERVICE_REQUEST can be driven by three events:

1. Actively activated by software by calling the `acrc` instruction.
2. Linx logic core (LxLC) encounters synchronization exception on the execution pipeline.
3. The Linx logic core (LxLC) detects the asynchronous interrupt on the execution pipeline.

`acrc` and exception are both synchronous and called `SYNC_SERVICE_REQUEST`. interrupt is asynchronous and called `ASYNC_SERVICE_REQUEST`.

`SYNC_SERVICE_REQUEST` and `ASYNC_SERVICE_REQUEST` are collectively referred to as `陷阱` in this article, and the process of entering `陷阱` is called `陷入`.

When a trap occurs, the cause of the trap is represented by the parameters `陷入代号` (`Trap Number`, or `Trap No`) and `陷入原因代号`. The specific definition of these two parameters,

* For interrupt, please refer specifically to the definition of each `Xproxy`.
* For exception, please refer to `s_exception_trap_no`.If the trap code of a exception is t and the cause code is c, this article will simply describe the exception as the exception of "t(c)".

Some traps contain more information explaining why, these parameters are called `陷入参数` (`TrapArgs`) and are determined by each specific trap.

When a trap occurs, the trap code and cause code are stored in SSR:[TRAPNO_ACRn](../register/ssr/TRAPNO.md), and the trap parameters are stored in SSR:[TRAPARG0_ACRn](../register/ssr/TRAPARG0.md).

SERVICE_REQUEST is always fired from a certain instruction position, which is jointly defined by BPC and TPC. The information specified by this BPC and TPC is called `陷阱源指令` of this SERVICE_REQUEST, or `源指令` for short.

It should be noted that not all exception will trigger the SERVICE_REQUEST process. If exception occurs in a `主动修复块` that has not been taken over, the exception will be processed according to the definition of the active repair block.

### <span id="SR_Process">SERVICE_REQUEST process</span>

For any SERVICE_REQUEST from ACRn to ACRm, the specific behavior is,

* If it is related to exception generated by floating point operation, set the corresponding flag bit in CSTATE.flags.
* The current `SSR:CSTATE` is saved to `SSR:ECSTATE_ACRm`. If the trigger command is header instruction, set SSR:ECSTATE_ACRm.BI to 0, otherwise set to 1;;
* The BPC of exception block is saved to `SSR:EBPC_ACRm`;
* Save the BARG content of the exception block to `SSR:EBARG_ACRm`, and set `EBARG_ACRm.BlockType` to trigger block type.
* If the exception block is an STD, SYS or FP block, save the TPC that triggers the exception instruction to `SSR:ETPC`;
* If the exception block is an MPAR, MSEQ, VPAR or VSEQ block, save the GroupID that triggered exception to the `EBARG.GroupID` field.
* CSTATE.I is set to 0; # interrupt enable bit
* CSTATE.ACR position is m;
* BARG reset to initial value;
* BPC is set to EVBASE_ACRm;
* For SYNC_SERVICE_REQUEST,
  * TRAPNO_ACRm.E is set to 1;
  * Set `SSR:TRAPNO_ACRm` and `SSR:TRAPARG0_ACRm` according to the trap code and parameters.
* For ASYNC_SERVICE_REQUEST,
  * TRAPNO_ACRm.E is set to 0;
  * Set `SSR:TRAPNO_ACRm` and `SSR:TRAPARG0_ACRm` according to interrupt type. For specific values, refer to the corresponding `Xproxy` definition.

The above actions are completed once inside the Linx logic core (LxLC), and there will be no other actions that change the state of the Linx logic core (LxLC).

<!--
需要特别指出的是：如果在ACRn中的管理软件处理SERVICE_REQUEST的时候，触发第二次`SERVICE_REQUEST`，而该次`SERVICE_REQUEST`的目标ACR仍是ACRn，那么ZXTERMZH6QXZ[EBSTATEP](../register/ssr/EBSTATEP.md)指向的`EBSTATE` 会被覆盖，未保存的内容将永远丢失，软件需要通过针对性的设计规避这个问题。
 -->

## BSTATE and EBSTATE

The internal state of a `块执行单元` is called `BSTATE`, and different `块执行单元` may use different formats of `BSTATE`.

!!! note "Attention!"

    Please note: CSTATE is not part of BSTATE, it is the state of the first layer architecture.

And **EBSTATE (Exception Block State)** is the storage space used to save and restore state. The implementation of this space may be different depending on the block type.

### **STD, SYS, FP block**For block instruction of STD, SYS, and FP types, which are used for scalar operation or system-level control, the status within the block is relatively simple. Its EBSTATE is implemented by system register together with memory.

When exception or interrupt is triggered, the hardware needs to save the relevant contents of BSTATE to system register, specifically:

- Write BARG.BPC to **SSR:EBPC**;
- Write BARG.BPCN to **SSR:EBPCN**;
- Write the remaining fields of BARG to **SSR:EBARG**;
- Write TPC to **SSR:ETPC**.

When exception recovers, the hardware needs to load the above system register content back to the corresponding internal block register to ensure that block instruction continues execution correctly from the exception trigger point.

Whether other T/U and other scalar registers in BSTATE are saved to memory and restored is decided by the operating system.

### **VPAR, VSEQ, MPAR, MSEQ blocks**

For VPAR, VSEQ, MPAR, MSEQ and other types of block instruction, the state within the block is relatively complex and requires a very large space to save EBSTATE. Its EBSTATE is implemented by system register and Tile register.

When exception or interrupt is triggered, the hardware needs to save the relevant contents of BSTATE to system register, specifically:

- Write BARG.BPC to **SSR:EBPC**;
- Write BARG.BPCN to **SSR:EBPCN**;
- Write the remaining fields of BARG to **SSR:EBARG**;
- Record the ID of the Group that triggered exception in **SSR:EBARG**.

When exception recovers, the hardware needs to load the above system register content back to the corresponding internal block register to ensure that block instruction continues execution correctly from the exception trigger point.

Whether the status of other registers in BSTATE is saved to the Tile register or memory and restored is determined by the operating system. These include:

- You can save all or a certain type of Tile registers to memory by calling the TSTORE instruction;
- You can save the Group's TPC and LPR to the Tile register by calling ESAVE template block;
- The contents of the Tile register output by ESAVE can be saved to memory by calling the TSTORE instruction.

If `块执行单元` is interrupted by `SERVICE_REQUEST` during execution, and its `BSTATE` has changed and has not been committed, then the state of this `BSTATE` is called `脏` (`dirty`). Otherwise, its state is called `干净` (`clean`).
of.

If a block is interrupted by `SERVICE_REQUEST` during execution, and the corresponding `BSTATE` status is dirty, the content of the `BSTATE` will be saved in the `EBSTATE` specified by `EBSTATEP`, and at the same time, the `SSR:CSTATE`.ebv field is set to 1. On the contrary, if a block is interrupted by `SERVICE_REQUEST` during execution, and the corresponding `BSTATE` status is clean, the `EBSTATE` specified by `EBSTATEP` remains unchanged, and at the same time, the `SSR:CSTATE`.ebv field is set to 0.

<!--
.. cnote::

  调度软件，比如操作系统，可以通过保存和恢复脏的上下文恢复被打断的块的执行。如
  果仅仅是进行保存和恢复，它可以忽略EBSTATE的具体格式，仅保存EBSTATE的内容或者
  EBSTATEP指针进行上下文保存。但如果这些调度软件，或者相应的调试软件需要解释或
  者修改其中的内容，则需要深入解释EBSTATE每个域的具体含义。

  `SSR:CSTATE`.ebv的值在被`SERVICE_REQUEST`流程设置后，如果没有
  其他主动修改行为，它会维持不变，并在下一次`SERVICE_REQUEST`中被保存到
  `SSR:ECSTATE_ACRm`。所以调度软件需要根据是否需要用EBSTATE的内容恢复
  以前的执行，在恢复上下文的时候更新`SSR:ECSTATE_ACRm`.ebv的值。
 -->

## system-call blockACR switch

system-call block is used to quickly (within one block) complete service requests for high-privilege level ACR software.The call to system-call block is initiated through `XB`. After a privilege level check is performed based on the ACR at the time of the call, the current ACR is directly switched to the specified target ACR. The subsequent preparation, execution and submission phases of system-call block are all executed at the target ACR privilege level. After the submission is completed, the instruction automatically switches back to the ACR when `XB` is executed.

This article calls the ACR when `XB` is called `调用者ACR` of this system-call block, and the ACR used in the preparation, execution and submission stages is called `被调用方ACR` of this system-call block.

The above process does not affect the content of EBSATE. If interrupt or exception occurs during the preparation, execution and submission phases of system-call block, or `acrc` is executed during the execution phase, execute according to the SERVICE_REQUEST process.

In this case, the internal state of the block and the address of the caller's BPC are saved in EBSTATE. When calling ACR_ENTER through this state to restore the run of the block, it first restores to the callee ACR of this system-call block, then completes the outstanding instructions of the block (including submitting implicit instructions), and then restores to the caller ACR of this system-call block.